KN and we're continuing on with a series of
mind control in Canada. We've heard over the
last 3 weeks a lecture by Dr. Colin Ross about
the history of the CIA and military mind control
experimentation programs uh documented history.
Today we're going to start a an interview part
one of a two-part interview with Dr. Colin
Ross as we go into a bit more detail and
uh explore the other many issues around this
situation. You're listening to CKLN 88.1.
I'm speaking with Dr. Colin Ross, a psychiatrist
and researcher practicing in Dallas, Texas. And
uh uh Dr. Ross, I wonder if you could just
uh briefly describe who you are and what your
current work is. Sure. I'm a Canadian by birth and
training. I went to medical school in Edmonton and
did my psychiatry training in Winnipeg. I moved
down here to Dallas just a little over 5 years
ago. I'm a specialist in multiple personality
disorder and I've written a number of different
books and lots of research papers and so on on
that. Right now I'm working at a hospital in the
Dallas area here. We have a program that we run
on contract for the hospital which treats mostly
people with multiple personality disorder. also
uh other related disorders. Most of the people
that we treat describe very traumatic and abusive
childhoods. Now um what is a dissociative identity
disorder and is it the same thing as multiple
personality disorder? Dissociative identity
disorder is the official new name for multiple
personality disorder hasn't really caught on
in the general language. It's a professional
technical term. In 1994, that new diagnosis was
introduced. It just replaces multiple personality
disorder and the criteria for diagnosing it
have been changed a little bit basically by
adding a requirement for some type of amnesia,
but basically it means the same thing as multiple
personality. So, what does it mean when somebody
has this disorder? What Well, the basic criteria
for diagnosing are pretty straightforward.
You have these different personality states or
identities that take turns being in control of the
body and there's some sort of amnesia or memory
barrier between the different personality states.
The several important points to understand about
this disorder are first of all it's not literally
true that they have different personalities.
They just have these fragmented components of
one personality and those have been referred to
as different personalities for over 100 years but
they're not literally different personalities.
There isn't really more than one person there.
And there's several different ways you can end
up having multiple personality. One way, which is
what we think we see most of the time clinically,
is where you've basically been physically,
sexually, emotionally abused or neglected as a
child, and you create these different identities
to cope with it and hold different memories and
feelings about it and so on. And that can be,
as I said, a combination of various types
of trauma in childhood. It has to be fairly
serious trauma usually. Then another way that
you can get multiple personality is um where
it's created either by mistake or deliberately by
somebody else. And that could be in a bad therapy
which is all out of control and not being handled
properly. And then the other major way of arriving
at multiple personality disorder is people
who have what's called a factitious disorder.
That means that they deliberately fake having
it either to get into the patient role or get
attention or get out of something or for some
specific purpose. Now, have you seen this disorder
occur um due to trauma as an adult or does it
specifically happen while while a child? Well,
there's some cases reported in the literature and
there's the odd case where it's trauma that starts
in adulthood, but vast majority of time it seems
to be childhood. Right. We've uh listened to your
lecture um talking about the history of uh US mind
control. You refer to the term yatrogenic. What
does that mean? Yatrogenic is just a Greek word
that means created by the doctor. So yatrogenic
multiple personality is multiple personality
that's created by mistake by a bad therapist
who's using improper techniques. Okay. How did you
get involved in working with people suffering from
DID? Well, I actually diagnosed my first case
when I was a medical student in Edmonton and
uh just instantly found it really fascinating
and interesting. And then when I was doing my
four years of psychiatry training in Winnipeg,
I saw one more case and I thought it was going
to be too rare to really specialize in. But then
in ' 85 when I finished my psychiatry training,
I diagnosed another case and then I got some
referrals and then more referrals and then I
got a reputation for it and ended up getting lots
of referrals from all kinds of different people in
Western Canada and gradually sort of switched over
to that being my specialty. And this this was when
you were operating a practice in is it Winnipeg or
Edmonton at the time? Yeah, Winnipeg. Right. I was
a full-time uh university professor of psychiatry
at one of the hospitals there. And and what did
you find from what were your findings from working
with people with DID or MPD? Well, I've published
just on multiple personality and related things.
I've published probably about 60 or so papers in
the professional literature. So, I've found quite
a few different things, but the main theme is
really goes through the whole multiple personality
literature. And that is that people who have this
diagnosis clinically uh have lots of other things
going on at the same time. lots of depression,
lots of anxiety, drug and alcohol problems,
eating disorder problems, sleep problems. So,
they don't just have multiple personality,
they got all kinds of different symptoms. They
also tend to be in the health care system for
quite a long period of time. Not all the time,
but the majority of cases are in the health care
system getting psychiatric treatment for one thing
or another for quite a while. On average about
uh 7 years before the multiple personality is
diagnosed. And the other theme that we see going
all the time is this childhood trauma that arises
as a way of coping with childhood trauma. And then
we just uh actually just found out this week that
a paper has been accepted at the American
Journal of Psychiatry where we assessed 103
people with this diagnosis here in Dallas about
uh almost exactly four years ago now. We gave
them a whole bunch of different questionnaires
and standardized tests and interviews and so on.
And then we followed up as many as we could two
years later. And we were able to follow up 54 of
them. And the uh reduction in all these different
symptoms was really impressive. And 12 already in
the first two years of follow-up, 12 of the 54
people were all integrated back into one person.
So they had a really dramatic and meaningful
reduction in not just the amount of multiple
personality related symptoms, but depression,
anxiety, substance abuse, all kinds of things.
So this is the first uh scientifically designed
kind of treatment outcome study that really
shows that good treatment can be very helpful. So
these people that you're talking about did undergo
treatment with you or other other therapists came
they came to our hospital usually for an average
of about 17 days or so. Mhm. Uh 70% of our people
are from outside Texas. So they're from all over
the United States and we've had probably about
15 admissions of people from Ontario and they
were then go home and are followed up by their
therapists. So they only get about usually two,
three, sometimes four weeks with us and they may
go into our day hospital program for a little bit
as well, but basically they're followed up by
therapists all over the country. And are these
therapists in contact with you in terms of um
methods of therapy? Yeah, they've usually read
my books and been to some of my workshops and
are aware of my approach, but they don't have
to necessarily follow my approach. Right. And
these other symptoms that you were talking about,
do you feel that they were also a result of
childhood trauma? Yeah, the whole package seems
to be related to childhood trauma. Uh now we got a
lot of controversy about this going on in society
in the psych psychology, psychiatry, sociology
and so on, right? And we need a lot more research,
but that's the best understanding I have right
now. And there's fair bit of research data that
backs that up. It's not totally nailed down
scientifically. Mhm. Um, I'm wondering from
your experience working in in Canada, how has the
Canadian medical system responded to your your
findings in in MPD research? Well, roughly about
the same as American. Overall, there's a lot of
skepticism, a lot of political agitation, fair bit
of negative hostile propaganda and backstabbing
about it. And u, and then there's also quite a
lot of support. And obviously if I've gotten 50
or 60 professional papers published, I'm getting a
reasonable reception. The main difference between
Canada and the United States was in Canada, I just
couldn't get the financial or clinical support to
set up and run a program. And the reason that's
possible down here is because there's a private
for-profit sector in the mental health system
that's profit driven. That's a business. and
the the hospital corporation I contract with
is traded on the New York Stock Exchange and so
on. And since I attract patients, then there's a
financial motive for the hospital to be interested
in me providing that service. So that financial
motive allows the system to sort of set aside all
of these ideological and political debates that
go on and so therefore I'm able to run a program.
So for the uh survivors of childhood abuse that
you're dealing with, I I guess they would have to
have access to some kind of um funds to be able
to undergo therapy. What what what is your sense
of of uh people um that have undergone this in
childhood that do not have access to to therapy?
Well, the uh breakdown in terms of insurance
coverage that we have in our program is roughly
about 50% are on Medicare, which is a government
disability program. So, they're sort of like
Canadian healthcare system people in that their
health insurance is basically paid for by the
government. And they also get disability welfare
type payments for their basic support and living.
So, half of our people are really insured in a way
fairly similar to Canada. Then the other half have
some sort of private insurance through their
employers or their spouse's employers. The if
you're in the one-third of people in the United
States who don't have proper medical insurance,
then you can't get proper medical care, including
psychiatric and including the kind we provide. So
that would seem to be uh probably a reason to
think that the Canadian health care system is
superior to the US. The funny thing is that if you
have multiple personality or a related disorder,
your odds of getting treatment are actually
better in the United States because there's
more programs and more therapists available. In
Canada, even though you have universal access
and universal coverage and actual practical
reality, you can't get the treatment. So, you
got theoretical universal coverage for multiple
personality and trauma related disorders, but you
don't have real practical coverage in reality.
Well, the sort of paradox is that in the United
States actually a higher percentage of people who
could benefit from psychotherapy for all kinds of
problems arising from their childhoods um who
can actually get therapy is higher in the US.
Interesting. Um now in your previous lecture you
did uh go into a lot of um uh detail outlining the
history of mind control. What is the link between
MPD and mind control experimentation? Well,
how I got into this is a sort of a backdoor
route. I I didn't really have any interest in
the CIA or the military or mind control research
or all of that. Particularly when I left Canada,
hadn't read about it. Hadn't really heard
any other doctors talking about it. Hadn't
heard any patients talking about it. And pretty
soon after I arrived in Texas in early 1992,
multiple personality patients started talking
about kind of real strange experiences I didn't
know what to make of that involved either going
into hospitals, some sort of research setting
somewhere on a military base and having different
kinds of experiments done on them which involved
um EEG machines or some kind of scientific
equipment and sensory deprivation,
maybe physical spinning, maybe hallucinogens,
and it wasn't any kind of uh cult and obviously
wasn't just their parents or something going
on in their family. And initially I thought
that was really too much to believe. But then I
decided I should at least look into it a little
bit. So I started basically in early '92 doing a
little bit of reading. And the more reading I did,
what amazed me was that instead of coming to the
conclusion, oh well, this is not possible. There's
no documentation of this kind of stuff. Actually,
the more I read, the more documentation I got that
all kinds of absolutely unbelievable and bizarre
and unethical and harmful mind control research
has been done in Canada and the United States
since the Second World War. And I've actually
um interviewed and spoken with a number of people
who have documented mind control research. Most of
the patients that we work with who we hear these
kind of things from, we get zero documentation
that it's actually real. So I kind of disconnected
my my research or my study about this from the
stories I was hearing from the patients and did it
as a separate research project. And what I've done
then over the last 5 years is uh talked to lots
of other people in the field who are interested in
this. Read pretty well everything that's written
on it. And through the Freedom of Information Act,
I've got somewhere in probably in the ballpark
of six or 7,000 pages of documents from the CIA
which I've reviewed. And then I've gone to the uh
medical school library and I've sent my secretary
to five or six different places in the United
States to go into archives in special collections
and library resources and so on. So I've ended
up now with probably more than almost two full
four drawer filing cabinets full of documentation
on all kinds of things. how I got into this and
the connection with multiple personality for me
personally was just that my multiple personality
patients were the ones who started telling these
kind of stories and got me interested in it. Right
now from from a therapist point of view, how
how do you tell if somebody is giving you an
account of actual abuse or whether they're just
fabricating something? Well, basically all the
professional associations including the Canadian
Psychiatric Association that have made statements
on this and all the scientific research completely
supports the conclusion that you can't tell. And
that goes both ways. You cannot tell. You can't
tell for sure just by listening to the patient's
story. You can't tell that it's true. Also, you
can't tell for sure that it's false. In other
words, you can't tell one way or the other without
some sort of outside proof. that is proof that
it really happened or proof that it really didn't
happen. And what I've learned in the especially in
the last five years is there's really no limit to
how detailed, how compelling, how full of feeling,
how detailed a bunch of memories can be and
be either totally real or never have happened.
M I've worked with people who had really really
really elaborate memories of all kinds of things
with tremendous amount of detail and then we've
been able to prove it never happened. Right. So
that uh can't tell and that's why I decided to
do this research kind of separated off from what
the patients were telling me. right now. What
um what uh similarities have you come across
in within the survivor accounts and what you've
discovered in the CIA documentation about their
mind control programs? Well, basically, if you
take a a typical elaborate story that you'll hear
from one of multiple personality patients who have
these kind of memories and you break it down into
the elements or components of the mind control
techniques that they describe, I've been able to
document just about every one with maybe one or
two exceptions. And all of this was carried out
in a series of programs that um really began in
the Second World War with what was called the OSS,
the Office of Strategic Services, the precursor
to the CIA. Yeah. It was set up immediately after
Pearl Harbor when it became obvious that there
was a huge problem with US military intelligence
gathering because they were totally surprised
by the Japanese. And so it was set up in about
1941. And then at the end of the war, the OSS was
disbanded. And then two years later, the personnel
were rolled over into the CIA, which was created
in September 1947 through the National Security
Act. Basically the same people who had been in
the OSS. And the OSS did various kinds of drug
research and mind control research uh including
with hallucinogens and so on and marijuana and
sodiuml and so on and different types of drugs.
Also they did experiments with hypnosis. There's
um then a little bit of a gap before the CIA
started up a series of programs in 1951. There was
two programs called Artichoke and Bluebird that
ran until about 1953 and they were rolled over
into MK Ultra which ran from 1953 to 1964. Then MK
Ultra was rolled over into MK search which ran up
till 1973 and then running concurrently with MK
Ultra and MK search. There's about roughly about
10 other programs that are declassified. There's a
little smattering of information on each of those.
They have names like MK Naomi and QK Hilltop
and MK Delta. The the by far the best known and
the one that I have the most documents on is MK
Ultra. Mhm. It involved 149 different uh separate
contracts at about 80 different institutions all
around Canada and the United States. And in MK
Naomi, MK Ultra and MK search, there's basically
about three major blocks of types of mind control
research. about uh half the projects in MK Ultra
for instance were on some sort of procurement of
chemicals, supplying chemicals or manufacturing
chemicals which is mostly hallucinogens sometimes
uh biological warfare weapons such as bacteria and
viruses and sometimes other types of chemicals for
mind control research. So it was just straight
contracting to get the chemicals. An example of
that would be in 1953, one of the MK Ultra sub
projects, was a $400,000 grant to Eli Liy, which
is the drug company that manufactures Prozac. Mhm.
And that was for manufacturing LSD. So the the
first major supplier of LSD in North America was
actually Eli Lilly Drug Company. And and there's
evidence that the CIA had uh was responsible for
the distribution of this throughout the United
States and North America. Yeah, they used it in
actual experiments. Uh, and they also turned some
of it over to the military through their MK Naomi
program. A lot of the army mind control and drug
research was done at Edgeware Arsenal, which
has been in the news a lot recently because of
a lot of sexual assault and rape of female
um, army personnel there. And it's in uh,
it's linked to Fort Detric and Aberdine Proving
Ground in Maryland, sort of north a little bit
north of Washington DC. Is this the same military
base that uh the BBC documentary was done about uh
them giving um very powerful drugs to US soldiers?
Yeah. Yeah. That it's was the major center for all
kinds of hallucinogen and other drug research.
Um the main one would that's best known as LSD,
but actually the army released a list of about 130
different compounds that it tested in mind control
research that was released in 1975. So there's at
least 130 different uh drugs and different types
of compounds that they admit using on experimental
subjects and they admit to um again in the mid70s
they admitted to testing LSD on at least 1500
subjects. So if you just do the arithmetic very
roughly, if if they gave LSD to 1500 people and
they tested 130 different drugs, that was just
the army and you figure there's four branches of
the military in the United States plus the CIA,
you're talking about a huge number of people,
potentially hundreds of thousands of people who
got at least one dose of some experimental
mind control drug, usually without any kind
of adequate informed consent at all. Now, who
typically would these people be? Where where are
they drawing their their subjects from? Actually,
I'd just like to pop back to um talking about Eli
Liy for a second, just finish off that part of
the story, and then I'll answer that question.
Okay. Uh LSD was discovered accidentally in
1943 by a man named Albert Hoffman working at
Sand Pharmaceuticals in Switzerland. Mhm. Which
is a drug company. And uh what happened was that
in the late 40s early 50s a rumor developed that
the Russians might try to buy up the entire world
supply of LSD. So that's why the CIA decided to
contract with um the uh drug company in the United
States that manufactures Prozac, which is Eli Liy,
so they could have a secure North American supply.
And one of the things that amazed me absolutely
the most doing this background research was to
find out who the original acid heads were in North
America. Cuz you would assume it'd be beatnicks
or criminals or musicians or somebody or other.
Turns out that the original acid heads in North
America were actually the psychiatrists
and the CIA and military personnel. in in
uh conferences that were financially sponsored by
the CIA that resulted in books. I've got dozens of
these psychiatrists who are some of the major drug
researchers and major psychiatrists in the second
half of the 20th century all describing the acid
trips they were on, how much they enjoyed them,
how useful they thought they were, and describing
using LSD to treat all kinds of different things
from alcoholism to anxiety to even homosexuality,
which they considered to be a disease. So,
they were themselves turning themselves and each
other on. And then they were using all kinds of
different subjects. The majority would be either
psychiatric patients who are already in treatment
um army personnel, prisoners in several different
prisons in the United States or in one project
which was through MK Ultra. They actually had uh
prostitutes that they hired through MK Ultra and
they uh set up safe houses in San Francisco, New
York. The prostitutes would go out on the street
and recruit people for tricks. uh the CIA people
would watch the tricks through one-way mirrors and
monitor the sex and the prostitutes would slip
the John's LSD and other hallucinogens and the
these people were totally unaware that they were
involved in any kind of government experiment
totally unaware that they were going to get LSD
at all. Gave no consent whatsoever. So most of the
time the subjects were somebody who was one one
notch down in the power setup. They were either an
employee of the institution where the doctor was
doing the research, they were a patient, they were
um somebody in the military who loosely speaking
volunteered but really didn't have much choice
or they were prisoners. So usually was somebody
who was under the control of the administration
and under the control of the doctors somehow
to some extent. Now, what uh specifically what
prisons were involved in the uh the mind control
experiments? Uh one of the prisons that was the
New Jersey Reformatory at Bordontown, which is
in Pennsylvania. The investigator there was Carl
Feifer, who had a lot of uh MK Ultra and MK search
money. He was also um besides being at the New
Jersey neurosychiatric research institute which
is where he did the work at Bordontown. He was the
chairman of the department of pharmarmacology
at one of the major universities in Atlanta,
Emory University. And while he was there he
did LSD experiments on people in the Atlanta
uh penitentiary. Uh there was the um narcotics
farm in Lexington, Kentucky, which was a prison
that was uh mainly for drugrelated offenders.
And then uh one of the more sinister ones is
Vakavville State Prison in California. Mhm.
Vakavville State Prison was an MK search site
where they did um drug research related to the
drug pemoline which is called Silert. The trade
name is Silert. It's used for attention deficit
disorder in kids. They were using it to study
memory enhancement through drugs. And that was at
the same time as Donald Dreeze was an inmate at
Vakavville. Donald Defze was the head of the SLA
liberation army that captured Patty Hurst. Uh at
the same time that there was drug research going
on at the New Jersey Reformatory at Bordontown,
a man was then imprisoned there whose name was
Louis Castillo and he was uh later arrested in
the Philippines on suspicion of being there to
assassinate Marcos for Nan Marcos and he exhibited
uh five distinct personalities on um 40 different
interviews conducted by the Philippines FBI.
There was consultation from the Philippines FBI to
the American FBI his case also because he alleged
that he was involved in the Kennedy assassination.
There was a consultation with uh Gerald Ford who
was on the Warren Commission. So all of this
is sort of tied into all kinds of aspects of
the whole second half of the 20th century.
This very very twisted convoluted history.
Mhm. people who um were the expert witnesses
for Patty Hurst uh who were saying that she
had been captured by the Simines Liberation Army
and brainwashed by them using the mind control
techniques of destructive cults which are very
similar to the mind control techniques of the
CIA military mind control. The those witnesses
included uh Robert Lifton, Margaret Singer,
Martin, and a psychiatrist named Jolly West. and
Jolly West and Martin Orin were had top secret
clearance and had MK Ultra money. Their testimony
about Patty Hurst was that a new identity named
Tanya had been created through these brainwashing
techniques and Patty Hurst identified herself as
Tanya when she robbed a bank. She was convicted
and found guilty and actually sentenced to jail
for that. So the uh experts in a lot of the CIA
mind control programming were very aware of the
possibility of creating an artificial multiple
personality through mind control techniques.
And they testified that this had been done by this
character Donald Defreeze who was a black criminal
who was basically a petty criminal and thief. The
there's several strange twists of that story. Uh,
one of the strange twists which is somewhat
documented but not completely documented is
that Donald Def's according to several different
sources and according to Patty Hurst uh biography
as well was actually an employee of the CIA during
the Vietnam War who's a psychological warfare oh
sorry there's a not Donald Dere himself another
man named Coloulston Westbrook was an employee of
uh the CIA full-time and was a psychological
warfare expert in Vietnam camp and according
to these several different books, he came back
uh and got a job at the University of Berkeley
as a language instructor. And then he entered
Vakavville prison under cover of the Black
Cultural Association, which was a black prisoners
and inmates program. And undercover of that black
cultural association, he used mind control
techniques on Donald Defreeze and actually
gave him his code name of Sank and designed the
seven-headed Cobra logo of the Symbian Liberation
Army. Then Donald Dreeze was transferred
from a maximum security facility at VAC,
namely Vakavville to a low security facility from
which he immediately escaped and several months
after then captured Patty Hurst and used fairly
sophisticated mind control techniques on her and
created this Manurion candidate second identity
bank robber and her named Tanya. So unless all of
this is highly coincidental, um what you're saying
is that the SLA was a CIA creation. That's I don't
know for a documented fact that that's true, but
um that's what these several different books are
alleging and the information is fairly detailed
and I'm trying to research up on that. But it's
absolutely known for a fact that um these do
two doctors, Dr. West and Dr. Or had extensive
uh funding from all branches of military and and
he published off starting in 1943 and going all
the way up to 1971 very very detailed accounts
of creating multiple personality during the
Second World War for uh various branches of the
US military. And basically these people were he
called them multiple personality. uh he talked
about the multiple personality literature and he
referred to them as super spies. So the the idea
is that you create somebody artificially using
hypnosis and other mind control techniques who
had no multiple personality before but now has
this second identity and the second identity
is hidden behind a memory barrier or amnesia
barrier and there's a verbal access code that's
used to call out the second identity. And so now,
say the person is a marine, they'll be given
some kind of a courier assignment to take some
documents say to Tokyo, but GHS then calls out the
second personality and sticks in some classified
information into the second personality. The then
there's a switch back to the main identity. The
person is just going on this routine trip to take
some sort of documents or technical materials over
to Tokyo. when it gets to the far end then uh he
uses the example of a Colonel Brown. Colonel Brown
in Tokyo then uses the code signal and the example
that he gives and one of the description is that
this Colonel Brown says the moon is clear. As
soon as he says the moon is clear then the other
identity pops out gives the classified message.
Colonel Brown inserts a classified response. Then
the person pops back to their regular identity,
goes back home and thinks that they've just been
on a routine assignment. But Esther Brooks again
says the moon is clear. The identity comes out
and Esther Brooks gets the classified message
from this Colonel Brown. So he describes using
these people in hypnotic uh courier u missions
and for actual operations extensively many times
during the second world war. So this is in George
Eterbrook's own documentation that he's describing
this right and he also describes using them for in
infiltration operations. So the idea there is you
take somebody who's a loyal patriotic marine and
you create in them a new identity of a communist
and you submerge the previous identity of the
patriotic marine. Now this person who's a a really
diehard communist goes and infiltrates various
communist cells or political organizations or
does whatever spy work is required. And the idea
is if one of these couriers or these infiltration
agents is captured and interrogated, they actually
have no idea that they're spies. They genuinely
think they're either on just a routine mission or
they generally believe that they're communists. So
then they can't be interrogated and they can't
be uh made to reveal information so easily.
And then what of course they go in and they
do whatever infiltration operation is required
and then they come back and they're debriefed by
Esther Brooks who knows how to get through to the
original personality and some of these people are
actually g according to Esther Brooks were given
dishonorable discharges as part of their cover.
Now one question about that is is Etorbrooks
just telling tall tales? Well, I've been able to
build up a lot of documentation about him and his
uh personal archives are still housed at this
Colgate College. I photocopied probably what
would be a pile of paper at least a foot deep. And
what did that those documents reveal to you? Well,
it's all his personal papers, correspondence,
background, and so I've got uh actual original
documents photocopied now showing that he in
fact was employed by the War Department during
the Second World War. um he uh marketed his ideas
to every branch of military intelligence in the
United States. There's tons of correspondents
with him from all kinds of navy, army, air force
intelligence people. Uh he did a lot of training
at Fort Hullird and other locations. Um, and one
of the most interesting things about him is that
he corresponded pretty regularly with Jay Edgar
Hoover from the 1930s through into the 1960s. He
had a lot of correspondence with Jed Garoover.
There was a lot of FBI personnel who came out and
visited him, attended his different teachings and
uh a lot of these people talked about reading
his textbook which came out in 1943 that's called
hypnotism and in that textbook he describes
these um artificial multiple personalities in
a lot of detail. I've got good documentation of
the CIA in Bluebird and Artichoke did pretty much
the same experiments. They describe several
different things. They they don't describe
actual operations, but they describe real life
simulations where they're testing these people.
So, they describe the same thing that Sbrooks is
talking about where they uh hypnotize somebody
and condition them and create a second identity
that can stand up on to a lie detector test.
Also, they describe creating amnesia barriers
and having people go on assignments where they
go into another building and rifle through
some materials and take some documents and
bring them back and then have no memory of doing
that whatsoever. And uh in MK Ultra there was a
contractor named Alden Sears who did experiments
at the University of Minnesota and the University
of Denver which were very similar and there's
a lot of documentation of him uh procuring CIA
safe houses for some of his experiments coming and
doing demonstrations of these kind of techniques
for military and CIA personnel and uh creating
hypnotic couriers and so on. So there's several
sets of documents that back up that this was done
at an experimental level by the CIA successfully,
but I don't have documents about their use in
operations. Now you mentioned that there were
three areas of of interest in the mind control
experimentation. Um wonder if we could just review
those again. You you mentioned drugs. A big chunk
was just uh manufacturing and supplying drugs,
chemicals, and biological weapons. Another uh
large chunk was actually using the drugs in
experiments on people to try and create amnesia
to create altered states of consciousness to test
the drugs for interrogation purposes and also to
test them for detecting hypnotically programmed
agents. There was a team called the Artichoke team
that was created as part of Project Artichoke that
would use different chemical and mind control
sensor deprivation techniques to try and figure
out if somebody had been hypnotically programmed
by another intelligence agency. In other words,
they were trying to pick up these hypnotically
controlled double agents that had been created
either by the KGB or whoever. Then about a quarter
of the research projects were just kind of odds
and ends of all different types, different
psychology and sociology experiments. Um,
a man named R. Gordon Wson who wrote a book
called Soma, the divine mushroom of immortality,
which is about that uh toad stool that you always
see in fairy tales, which has got a white stock
and a red cap with white flexcks on it. That's
a mushroom ammonita mascara. It's a hallucinagen
that was used by circumpolar shamans in both
uh northern Canada, Alaska, and Siberia for
centuries. So this R. Gordon Wson, who called this
mushroom soma, divine mushroom of immortality,
he had an MK Ultra grant through JP Morgan company
to go on an expedition to northern Mexico to try
and find hallucenic mushrooms. And just to give
you an example of how all these things kind of tie
into our culture at large, J. Chester Brooks gave
uh three or four major symposia that he set up at
Colgate College and he invited all kinds of people
to them which included Martin Or um in one of the
actually two of the different uh conferences
or symposia that he put on Aldis Huxley came
and talked and Aldis Huxley used hallucinogens
himself and wrote the novel the brave new world
in the brave new world which is a science fiction
book, the government controls the people by giving
them a mind control drug called soma. So all these
things are kind of very strangely interconnected
with each other. Not as part of a huge conspiracy,
but just because all these people knew each other,
talked to each other, influenced and affected each
other. One of the um purposes of a lot of the sub
projects, four of the MK Ultra sub projects were
on children and three of those investigators knew
that it was did not know it was CIA money and
one did know it was CIA money. But the research
projects themselves were pretty bland and not very
alarming. So the purpose there as stated by the
CIA is not really the research as such. One of
them MKlra sub project 103 was at the children's
international summer camp in Maine and it was a
camp basically where children from all kinds of
different countries would come and spend uh weeks
or a summer and the purpose of the research was to
study how children communicate and solve problems
when they don't share a common language but the
purpose of the CIA funding which was secret was
that they wanted to establish contact with a
whole bunch of foreign international children who
were as young as 11 years old because they might
be of potential intelligence use in the future. In
other words, they were just interested in getting
an inn so they could make a list of people
and start figuring out who might be an good
person to recruit for whatever CIA purpose in the
future. And they were doing this with really just
children. Now you also you mentioned that um uh
multiple personalities are much easily much more
easily created um within children and if the
um uh if the military and CIA's um goals were
to use multiple personalities for intelligence
purposes um is there evidence of experimentation
on children? uh not experimentation to
create multiple personality directly,
but there's experiments on children that were
you would think were totally un unbelievable,
impossible, could never happen. And if if you
heard somebody telling you about them, you just
think the person was making it up or was diluted,
but actually I have the publications that describe
the research. One thing is that GH Esster Brooks
himself did some kind of hypnosis experiments on
children at two different orphanages in northern
New York. So he did create multiple personality
experimentally. He did correspond with Jed
Garoover about using hypnosis and drugs
on juvenile offenders and he did actually do
some kind of research at these two orphanages,
but I don't know the exact nature of the research
except that it involved hypnosis in some form.
But if if you think this is too much to believe,
there's no way that the CIA, the military would
do experiments to create multiple personality
in children. That's just too off-the-wall and
too bizarre. Uh it'd be helpful if you know what
actually is documented and what actually was done.
And one of the most revered psychiatrists who had
her obituary in the American Journal of Psychiatry
recently is a woman named Loretta Bender. She was
a child psychiatrist and you could interview any
child psychiatrist around the country and he would
speak in glowing terms about her contribution to
child psychiatry. In a publication uh that I have
on file that I photocopied that you can just get
at the medical school library. It's not hard
to get. She describes giving LSD in uh dosages
of 150 micrograms which is a big street level dose
for a kid to children aged 5 to 10 for days, weeks
and sometimes months in a row. She also described
giving hallucinogenic doses of psilocybin which
is the main compound in magic mushrooms to kids
as young as 5 years of age. So this network of
doctors whose drugs were supplied either by
the CIA or the military or by drug companies
funded by the CIA and the military gave massive
doses of LSD and other hallucinogens to kids
uh five 6 7 8 years old and they would keep them
on uh full acid trips up to months in a row. And
this was documented in the journals at the time.
Yeah, it was published in the reg regular medical
journals. You can just go to the library and
photocopy. And there was no outcry in the in the
profession against this. I mean, this sounds like
torture. No, it was just regarded as psychiatrist
doing research and trying to help kids. That's
the thing that's most amazing about all of this
is you don't have to have a conspiracy theory. Uh,
and really conspiracy theories are interesting,
but kind of beside the point. I think the thing
that's most amazing is that all this kind of
stuff is just straightforward everyday regular
activity of psychiatrists and psychologists. It
gets published. It gets presented at conferences
and nobody comments on it or gets outraged about
it or does anything about it. Incredible. Another
thing, another type of research that's fully
documented and again if you know the references,
any medical school library has these references on
file and you can go and photocopy them. There's
a whole body of research on brain electrode
implants. The main people who were doing that were
um this Jolly West tried to set up a program in
u Los Angeles to do that which was approved
by Ronald Reagan but then got shut down by
public protest. The main work was done at Tlane
University in New Orleans by Robert Heath, at Yale
by Jose Delgato and at Harvard by a team that
included Frank Irvin and William. So these are the
the major universities in the western world. What
they basically did was they would stick very fine
electrodes into a human being's brain often up
to 15 20 25 electrodes at one time and they would
stick them in specific centers in the brain or
specific areas in the brain. And then they would
stimulate the electrodes electrically through
wires and that would cause the electrode to
discharge which would cause that part of the brain
to fire. And then uh Jose Delgado at Yale made a
technical advance which was he invented a remote
transmitter box that in the 1960s had a range of
up to 100 ft. So he could push a button on the
box that would transmit a signal to the electrode.
There'd be a firing of the electrode and that part
of the brain would then get activated. And in the
u books and the papers that are published, he
describes also doing this in cats and in monkeys.
And he refers to these monkeys as mechanical toys
because he could control their body movements and
control their behavior. An example of what he did
with monkeys was he had uh a group of monkeys who
are all in the same species living in a large
cage. And they have a dominance hierarchy. That
is they have a boss monkey who runs the whole show
and then they have a whole bunch of submissive
males and females. And in the normal setup, the
boss monkey has half the cage to himself and all
the other monkeys get to use the other half. And
if they try and come in his space, then he gets
mad or gets angry or beats them up or threatens
them or whatever. And this is just the sort of no
normal social structure of these monkey troops.
What he did then was he implanted an electrode
in the brain of the boss monkey. And when he
pushed a certain button on his transmitter box,
the boss monkey became completely passive. And so
the other monkeys started to figure this out and
would start getting bold and would come into his
part of the cage and would rough him up and not
pay attention to him. And so the next step in the
experiments was he put a lever in the actual cage
that the different monkeys could get their hands
on. They could press the lever. When they pressed
the lever, it then transmitted a signal to the
electrode in the boss monkeyy's brain, making him
be passive. So the other monkeys learned this. So
the other monkeys started practicing mind control
on the boss monkey by pressing the lever to make
him have these seizures in this part of the brain
that made him passive. They actually learned
how to control the boss monkey. And it shows
a picture of the other monkeys all over the cage
and not paying any attention to the boss monkey
at all. What he did then was he did this in human
beings, including children. And he describes an
11-year-old boy that he put brain electrodes in.
And when he pressed the uh the right button on
the box, the boy would start talking about
maybe being a girl and would start talking
about wanting to marry a male therapist. So they
were using brain electrol implants to modify the
identity and the worldview and the behavior of
uh children as young as 11. Incredible. Robert
Heath who who did the same sort of stuff at Tulain
University. There's a he actually describes the
same case in several different publications and
the guy's referred to as subject B19 and he was
uh I forget if he was 18 or 20. He was in around
1820 maybe 19 and he was a homosexual guy and they
viewed homosexuality as a medical disease which
needed to be treated. So they put brain electrodes
in this guy, one of which went into the area of
the brain called the septum, which was one of the
pleasure centers of the brain. And then they would
push the button uh which would cause the electrode
to fire. And he would not have excuse me, not have
a full orgasm, but would be sort of 3/4 of the way
to orgasm, feeling really really good as a result
of the button being pushed. And they they kind
of studied that and practiced it. And while they
were pushing the box, they would get him to watch
heterosexual pornography films so that he would
be experiencing a near orgasm while he's watching
heterosexual pornography. They were trying to
switch him over to being interested in women. And
then they did two further things. They set him
up with a little box of his own where he could
push the button on the box himself. And they have
a chart of different three-hour periods and they
show how many times he pushed the button himself.
He in one three-hour period got up to pushing the
button 1500 times to give himself an artificial
near orgasm. And then the final step they did in
the research was they brought in a 20-year-old
prostitute. This is to the medical school and
had her have sex with him. And while they were
having sex, they recorded the brain electrode
output because they it was a two-way communication
system. they could send a signal to the guy's
brain to fire off that part of the brain or they
could just use the electrodes to monitor the brain
activity that was going on naturally. So they
actually took brain electrode activity recordings
from deep inside his brain while he was having an
orgasm with this female prostitute. And then they
report that over an 11-month period of follow-up,
he was mostly heterosexual with a few relapses.
So this is just the the stuff that really went on.
A guy at uh Harvard who was part of the Harvard
brain electrode team, his name was William. He
was um testifying at the recent hearings and
there was a committee set up by Bill Clinton
to look into all the radiation experiments.
The radiation experiments are all intertwined
and overlap with all this mind control stuff.
And Williamu, who was part of the brain electrode
team at Harvard, described injecting plutonium
into people at Harvard as part of um atomic energy
commission military and CIA radiation research.
And he claimed that all of the subjects there gave
informed consent. But one of the subjects who was
named HP12, I think HP was initials for human
product. So they referred to their experimental
subjects as human product and then they would
have a series of numbers. So this guy was HP12.
He arrived at the emergency department at one of
the Boston hospitals which was part of the Harvard
system unconscious and unidentified. He was
injected with plutonium obviously without giving
informed consent. And he died uh without regaining
consciousness and without being identified. So
that didn't quite fit with the idea that everybody
gave informed consent. Mhm. And uh recently the uh
Clinton government uh approved a settlement of 4.8
million for just 12 of these plutonium subjects.
There's probably hundreds and hundreds and
hundreds of them. And this was the outcome of the
presidential hearing on radiation experiments. But
what I think and what I'm going to start logging
for is that there should be another hearing on
the mind control side of things. Right. and uh
the mind control experiments were introduced uh
at the end of um the hearings. Um can you can you
talk about that? What what evidence was introduced
and what the response was by the US government?
There was a number of different people. It was a
typical uh kind of presidential commission which
is like the various commissions of inquiry that
go on in Canada where they receive all kinds of
mail and correspondents and then they go around
the country having hearings that anybody can
testify at and they had hearings in Washington
that people went down to. So there's a number of
people who testified about um two aspects of this.
the documented stuff like I've been describing and
then the memories of individual patients of
stuff that they claim has gone on which isn't
documented. So the the things that uh I know for
sure went on and include that includes went on in
Canada were use of hallucinogens uh implantation
of these brain electrodes massive uses of electric
shock and that's electric shock is an ECT
treatment to make you have a seizure and also
just electric shock to different parts of your
body as part of behavior modification. um sensory
deprivation experiments where people were kept in
chambers for uh long periods of time until they
started hallucinating. Um uh you Cameron who's
the best known CIA contractor in Cameron did a
what's called psychic driving where he would make
people listen to tape loops for literally hours
and hours and hours and hours and hours per day
with repeated messages trying to modify their way
of thinking. So all of these different elements
have been used absolutely totally documented in
stuff that's published in medical school library
type journals. Mhm. One of my sort of favorite and
most bizarre series of experiments like that was
done at the University of Minnesota by a man named
Amado Morazzi who had an Air Force grant for LSD
research while at the University of Minnesota and
previous to that he was the uh one of the sort
of administrative managerial guys at Edgeware
Arsenal for their mind control research. uh he
besides just giving people LSD and so on he made
use of what's called the Ames leaf room that's
am a guy named Ames developed this room funded
by the office of naval research which is heavily
involved in all this mind control research themes
leaf room is uh has different forms can either
be a room that's usually built out of plywood
that's got walls that are at all kinds of weird
angles or this particular room was cubic So it's
a just a normal shaped kind of cube and you would
sit inside the room stuck one side would have no
wall at all. It would be open and that's a side
that you would be looking into and you would be
sitting just inside the room so that you couldn't
see anything except the walls and then the entire
room was lined with leaves. So leaves were glued
to all the walls. So there you are in this sort
of environment where you can't exactly see where
the corners are because of all these leaves. And
then when you're in the Ames leaf room either in
the research by Ames or this guy at University of
Minnesota, you would put on special glasses called
anchonic lenses. And the anoconic lenses would
distort all of the angles. So like the ceiling
would be sort of coming down at you. The floor
would be slam sliding some other weird angle. One
wall would be coming in at you and the other wall
going away. The leaves on one side of the room
would be all big and coming out at you and the
leaves on the other side would be kind of flat and
receding. And all of the different perspectives
didn't fit together properly. And then the subject
who's sitting in there looking through these
lenses has a little control mechanism to control
a bar that's at the far end of the room to try and
set it to horizontal. And it shows a photograph of
this guy sitting in there and the bar is like at a
40 angle, but he thinks it's horizontal. And then
the extra twist that Morazzi did was while he had
these people sitting in the Ames leaf room with
these weird goggles on, he gave them LSD. That's
all done on Air Force contracts. So this is pretty
weird and bizarre stuff. Yeah. Um what uh what if
any was the US government's response to the test
specifically the mind control experimentation
testimony at the um hearings on uh radiation?
Uh they just kind of acknowledged it and really
didn't comment or do much of anything with it. So
nothing has been done to follow up. Not nothing
systematic that I'm aware of. No. Right. I just
want to go back to uh when you were talking about
brain implants. Um, have you have you or other
therapists come across direct evidence of implants
in clients? Uh, nothing really conclusive. There's
kind of a a conspiracy literature about that that
exists that you can see find on the internet
and find in various publications and so on where
people will show x-rays and they there always
is somewhere in the x-ray what is supposed to
be an implant but it's kind of vague usually
and not really absolutely documented. I don't
think that's because it's not going on. I think
it's just because the documentation hasn't been
fished out yet. I haven't myself uh had a patient
who comes in for treatment and I've been able to
document that there's implants in this person's
brain. So the documented evidence indicates that
they're able to use implants for control purposes
and also to receive information from a person's
brain. Is that correct? Guy Jolly West who is the
expert witness for uh Patty Hurst who is also the
military and CIA contractor who's an expert on
multiple personality and different things. He
actually mentions multiple personality in his CIA
MK Ultra proposal. uh he tried to set up this UCLA
violence center that was going to be funded by
Ronald Reagan and Frank Irvin from the Harvard
brain electrode implant team was going to come and
one of the uh things that was going to be done at
the UCLA violence project and also was going to
be done at Vakavville State Prison under separate
administrative structure but which got shut down
by public protest was they were going to implant
brain electrodes in violent uh sex offenders and
then they were going to do two things. They were
going to use the electrodes as kind of like a
electronic bracelet inside the person's head. So
they were going to monitor the person's location
because of transmissions from the implanted
electrodes and then they would know if the person
had gone out of this is after their discharge
from prison. They would know if the person had
gone outside their restricted area. Also they
would be able to monitor the person's level of
sexual arousal through the brain electrodes.
So if the guy was outside his restricted area
and was starting to get sexually aroused, what
they would do would be then transmit a signal to
him that would just paralyze him. And one of the
uh things that was going to be done at the
UCLA violence project and also was going to be
done at Vakavville State Prison under a separate
administrative structure but which got shut down
by public protest was they were going to implant
brain electrodes in violent uh sex offenders and
then they were going to do two things. They were
going to use the electrodes as kind of like a
electronic bracelet inside the person's head. So
they were going to monitor the person's location
because of transmissions from the implanted
electrodes and then they would know if the person
had gone out of this is after their discharge
from prison. They would know if the person had
gone outside their restricted area. Also they
would be able to monitor the person's level of
sexual arousal through the brain electrodes. And
so if the guy was outside his restricted area and
was starting to get sexually aroused, what they
would do would be then transmit a signal to him
that would just paralyze him, just make him like
go catatonic or stop in his tracks and not move.
And then they would notify the police who would
go pick him up. And the there's a book called
Violence in the Brain by two of these Harvard
brain electrode people. and they discuss maybe
using these kind of electrodes to deal with people
who are w rioting like the Watts riots and so on
that were going on at that time. So there was a
whole scheme about how we were going to control
bad people in the population that we didn't
like and and this is their own uh literature
and own documentation that uh you're getting
this information from. This is all completely
published, objective, real, exists type stuff.
And does it go into detail about uh how the the
uh um electronic delivery mechanism is it by
satellite or by some kind of radio that they would
receive and send signals? Yeah, some um I don't
know a whole lot about the technical side of it,
but it was uh this is back in the 60s and 70s, so
they wouldn't have been doing satellite uplinks
on that at that point yet. Uh it would be some
sort of line of sight radio beam of some kind.
Another thing that uh also is documented in um
there's a journal called Defense Electronics in
the July 1993 issue. Uh there's a one-page article
there that describes technology that's under
development. There's a Russian guy who specializes
in this stuff. His name is Igor Smirnov. And it's
basically technology for beaming different forms
of radiation at people's heads. can either and
there's about four or five MK Ultra projects that
were on this kind of stuff. So, it can be either a
sound energy uh percussion sound percussion waves
uh or different types of light and radio frequency
and all kinds of different types of energy. So,
the Igor Smirnov is a specialist in this kind of
stuff who has technology that he's developed. He
was brought has technology that he's developed. He
was brought over in um March of 1993 to a meeting
in Northern Virginia that was attended by the CIA,
the Defense Intelligence Agency. I think I
remember the list, right? One of these might be
wrong, but definitely the CIA, definitely the FBI,
I think the Defense Intelligence Agency, I think
the National Security Agency, a representative
from General Electronics, and a representative
from one of the universities who all got
together to discuss the possibility of using this
technology on David Kuresh and this was during
the branch devidian siege. And according to the
article, the reason they decided not to use this
technology on him was uh problems with software
compatibility between the Russian software and
the American hardware. And what happened as an
upshot at the meeting was that a term called a
firm called Psycho Technologies that's based in
uh in Virginia, I forget which town in Virginia,
actually contracted with the Russians to develop
this kind of technology for possible American
usage. So that's all stuff that's actually real
that's actually going on that's undergoing some
sort of research and development. Currently in the
uh MK Ultra projects, they also describe
implanting brain electrodes in various kinds
of animals including dolphins and using them
as delivery systems for biological and chemical
weapons. So that's actually in the CIA materials
and they describe further research to fine-tune
those kind of systems that were already
in successful operational use. Do you have
evidence of DIA involvement in the mind control
experiments? Have you been able to get any DIA
documentation? The for listeners that don't know,
the DIA is the Defense Intelligence Agency. Um,
I understand that's the DIA is something like uh
10 times the size of the CIA as well. Actually,
the CIA, the the director of the CIA controls
only about 10% of the financial assets of the
American intelligence community, meaning that the
CIA is really a tiny fragment of all of military
and civilian intelligence in the United States.
The National Security Agency and the Defense
Intelligence Agency are both quite a bit bigger.
Um, the answer to your question is yes and no. The
no part is I don't have uh direct documentation of
defense intelligence agency mind control contracts
but it's really kind of beside the point
because all of these intelligence agencies
are all interconnected with each other right for
instance the CIA had two programs MK Ultra and MK
Naomi and they uh got federal funds which they
then put into MK Naomi and NK Naomi then funded
uh the special operations division at Fort
Detectric and Edgeware Arsenal to do mind control
research. So, and that's the way it is with the
radiation experiments too. The atomic energy
commission, health, education, welfare, the CIA,
all kinds of different government agencies are all
interlin and interconnected. One of the um Defense
Intelligence Agency programs was called Stargate.
There was a liaison between the CIA and the
Defense Intelligence Agency on that. It was just
declassified about roughly within the last year.
Um, and there was a a program on in December on uh
ABC TV, ABC's Night Line program in December where
Bill Gates, who was a former head of the CIA,
one of the guys who was the CIA person who was in
responsible for less on between the CIA and the
military on Stargate and one of the guys who was
a Stargate contractor all talking about Stargate.
uh which they admitted ran up until at least
1984 and had funding of at least $20 million,
which is probably just the tip of the iceberg.
And Stargate was a remote viewing program. So the
intelligence agencies all in an interconnected
fashion uh spent millions of dollars on remote
viewing, which is basically having psychics lie
down on a table and try and see what's going on
at some location in a foreign country to gather
intelligence information. There's a book that was
just published by um uh something Joseph Michael
Joseph I think it is which is a branch of Penguin
and British branch of Penguin books called Psychic
Warrior where a guy describes being one of these
remote viewers. A lot of that work was done at
the Stanford Research Institute in uh PaloAlto,
California. So I mentioned that partly because
it's interesting partly because if you think
that creating multiple personality disorder
is too bizarre and strange to be real. Again,
you have to look at this LSD, this brain electrode
research, some of the sensory deprivation that
Ames leaf room with those anisonic lenses using uh
millions and millions and millions of dollars to
pay psychics to spy on other countries while lying
on tables in the United States. Once you have that
context, then creating multiple personality just
seems kind of small. Now what what is like uh I
understand that the what's driving this was the
cold war uh you know back from the information
that we've got back late that's true and not
true right but let me explain why it's true
and not true okay just briefly that's actually
a disinformation setup the term brainwashing was
invented by uh a man named Edward Hunter who wrote
a book about brainwashing in the early 1950s that
I have a copy of. So he invented that term and
described how the um American pilots and prisoners
of war in the Korean War who were captured by
the Chinese and then were made to sign false germ
warfare confessions and were converted to being
communists had been brainwashed. And then the
whole idea was that the CIA and other intelligence
agencies had to figure out how that happened. and
Jolly West, Margaret Singer, and Robert Lifton
who testified at the Patty Hurst trial. They all
interviewed these returning prisoners of war
in the Korean War and became experts on mind
control and cult thought reform techniques and so
on. So, the idea was that because the communists
were doing that, we had to figure out how to
combat that. So, it was mainly defensive and
it was reactive to what the communist Chinese
were doing. But that's not true. uh because
GHBs was already doing that stuff in the second
world war or you know way before the Korean war.
So actually there was an offensive program of mind
control by the OSS and other intelligence agencies
uh 10 years before the Korean War. So the whole
idea that it was got started because of the cold
war is disinformation but then it obviously got
fueled and entrenched by the cold war. And then
the question becomes well the cold war is over.
Why do we need that stuff anymore? Right? And
I think the answer is severalfold. One is we in
fact do need to have intelligence agencies. The
world is not a safe place. And for us not to be
living in Siberia and getting sent to labor camps
in Siberia, we've got to protect ourselves from
all kinds of forces in the world. And to do that,
we have to have intelligence agencies. So I I
have no beef with the CIA as such or the existence
of intelligence agencies. I think they're
essential to maintaining freedom and democracy.
But once you've got intelligence agencies, you
got the military and you got a bunch of budgets,
you got people who like any federal bureaucrats
have to justify their exper their budgets and
their programs and everything. You got people
who are already into this and you've got actual
applications of it. And so it it'll just carry on,
I think, indefinitely. And the fact that the Cold
War is over, I don't see as being a major item
in this stuff stopping. Now you mentioned in your
previous lecture that you as you said you don't
blame the CIA per se but uh the psychiatrists
and doctors that are involved in this. Do you not
feel that the CIA is uh hold some responsibility
in funding and allowing the uh the doctors and
psychiatrists to operate? Oh absolutely. Yeah.
Like these people definitely were I mean the
victims of all of this definitely did not give
informed consent. Uh definitely it was unethical.
It was harmful. there was damages, they deserve
compensation and the federal government's on
the hook for that. And so the idea is not that
I'm sort of soft on the CIA or apologetic for
them. It's just that I'm basically psychiatrist,
right? So my number one concern is with all
this bizarre, unethical, destructive conduct by
my colleagues and the medical ethics of it and
getting the medical profession under control.
So what I think needs to happen is that it
should no longer be allowed that psychiatrist,
psychologists, doctors have funding from the
CIA or the military without the subjects of the
research knowing where the money is coming from
and knowing that it's not really medical research
as such. It's military intelligence warfare,
psychological warfare, mind control research.
um in some of the literature uh seems to suggest
that Canada was offered up to supply so-called
guinea pigs for the US mind control experiments.
Um I'm particularly referring to um the Al
Memorial at McGill University in Montreal with Dr.
Cameron. What do you think has Canada's role been
in in the US military mind control experiments?
Well, the uh Canadian Psychiatric Association
um put out some disinformation that's been
pretty well bought by the Canadian public
and that is that you and Cameron, it was just an
isolated incident. Happened a long time ago back
in the ' 50s that he had CIA funding. There were
sort of different ethical standards back then.
Of course, we wouldn't approve it now, but it was
just a one-time deal and he was such a great man,
we can overlook it. Well, that's not true because
that research completely violated the ethical
standards of the time. But also, it wasn't an
isolated incident. In fact, you Cameron wasn't
even the only person at McGill at that time with
CIA funding. Dr. Raymond Prince was funded through
MK Ultra sub project 121 to do um anthropological
psychiatry research in Nigeria. He didn't know at
the time it was CIA money. Donald Heb who is the
chairman of the department of psychology there did
a lot of sensory deprivation experiments funded
by Canada's defense research board when the CIA
stopped funding you and Cameron's work health
education and welfare Canada just picked it up
and continued this incredibly unethical harmful
destructive research that wiped out people's
memories for their whole lives um there's a man
named Hassan Azima who is a psychiatrist who died
of cancer in his early 40s who was being groomed
assumed to be a mind control researcher who was
doing LSD and sensory deprivation experiments at
McGill and who was presenting u at conferences
where all these other military and CIA funded
people were at. So he was in the loop. Um James
Tyhurst who in 1951 was part of a committee
meeting to oversee Bluebird and Artichoke in
Canada before you and Cameron got his money. uh
was also uh funded by Canada's defense research
board. He did LSD research also at MC Hollywood
Hospital in Vancouver and uh doctor named Ross
Mlan who was a director at Hollywood Hospital in
Vancouver attended a CIA sponsored LSD symposium
and described giving LSD to 338 different patients
at Hollywood Hospital. So there's a lot of
military LSD flowing into Vancouver. Then Abram
Hoffer and Humphrey Osman did a lot of military
LSD research in Saskatchewan. And Humphrey
Osman then left and moved down to the New Jersey
neurosychiatric institute in Pennsylvania where
Carl Feifer was which is where the Louis Castillo
guy was who was over in the Philippines and got
arrested by the FBI over there. So there's been
a lot of connections with Canadian psychiatry. A
spin-off of all of that. Some of the research is
funded by the military or the CIA or whoever
and then that gets published and presented
at conferences and talked about and then other
civilian psychiatrists who aren't directly funded
by the CIA start doing the same kind of stuff. Hm.
An example of that was at uh Penitentanglishing
Hospital which is the up on Lake Hiron there where
there's a basically a heavy duty facility for
people who are criminally insane, not guilty by
reason of insanity, unfit to stand trial. In the
years about 1968-69, there's four papers published
in the Canadian Psychiatric Association Journal,
which you can go to any of the medical school
libraries in Canada and just pull it off the
shelf and read it. This psychiatrist named Elliot
Barker, who's still alive, was working there. He
invented a little room called the capsule that was
about 8 by 10 ft. He would put prisoners as young
as 15 going up into early 30s in this capsule in
groups of either two up to uh seven at a time for
periods of days up to as 11 days at a time all
naked and often on LSD. So there's all these
violent offenders, murderers, arsonists, rapists
and so on. And he would have them in this little
small capsule all naked on LSD kind of doing
rap sessions and therapy groups with each other.
And the um room would be monitored by other
prisoners through the uh either video link
or camera link or through a mirror in the ceiling
and other prisoners were responsible for supplying
them food and so on. There was a one toilet inside
the capsule and they would be signaled to change
from one kind of therapy group to another by
changing the kind color of the light that was
shown into the room. So they were in this kind of
group sensory deprivation with changing colored
lights and um the idea was that this would get
through their defenses and then get to the real
stuff and do real therapy. One of the co-authors
on one of these patients is an HM Mason who's at
the bottom of the paper it says that he was a
patient at this Oakidge facility in Penitentang
on a ward called F-Ward that a documentary was
made about it by the CBC. actually have a copy
of a video of it. So, this HM is both one of these
patients who are all murderers and arsonists and
rapists and so on who's in this capsule getting
LSD and he's also a co-author on the paper. And
then apparently uh several of the former inmates
lived with Elliot Barker post discharge. And this
uh HM Mason, as far as I can tell, is the
same guy as Hank Mason. Hank Mason is on
the web page of the Canadian Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children, which is
um just what it says. It's Canadian Society for
Prevention of Cruelty to the Children. The current
president is Elliot Barker. And this Hank Mason
has got a who is identified as a founding member
of the society has a little statement about child
abuse on the web page. So it would appear that the
Canadian Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
of the Children has had executive members who
are former uh violent criminals in a facility
for the criminally insane currently being run by
psychiatrists who did all this kind of research
who published it in the Canadian Psychiatric
Association journal. Interesting. Just the kind of
stuff that it goes on and on and on and on and on
with more stories like this. What's your sense
of how many Canadian centers and doctors that
were involved in the experimentations? Uh well,
absolute minimum of 5 to 10. Mhm. Centers or
uh doctors and centers? Yeah. Okay. I mean for
sure there was McGill um Wurn Saskatchewan and
University of Saskatchewan, Hollywood Hospital,
um another hospital in Montreal where LS Divas.
I think I forget if it was Montreal General.
I think it was Montreal general, but I'm not
sure about that. I have it documented somewhere.
Then the same kind of stuff apparently not funded
by the military or intelligence was community was
going on at Penitentang. Is there any indication
that uh experiments were being done on military
bases themselves? Uh not documented evidence, but
there's quite a few accounts from patients that
are unverified. Yeah. Right. Um you mentioned that
like some of the uh doctors that were involved in
this research were unwitting. What uh what kind
of funding uh um institutes were set up to fund
this kind of research to unwitting doctors? Well,
they use what they called cutouts. A cutout is
a front funding organization. The three major
ones were the human ecology foundation, the Josiah
Macy Jr. Foundation and the Kashikar Medical Fund.
So each of these would be funded from the CIA and
then in turn they would fund right and the people
who were running those organizations knew that it
was CIA money and often themselves got grants from
the CIA. One of the guys who was on the board of
the human ecology foundation who reviewed grants
for the human ecology foundation and himself got
an MK Ultra grant and had top secret clearance
was Carl Rogers. That's kind of amazing because
Carl Rogers is best known for client- centered
therapy which is a kind of humanistic valuing
the spiritual worth of the client kind of therapy
where you have to have uh accurate empathy
unconditional positive regard for the person
and genuine uh empathy. So it's a it's like the
stereotype most humanistic touchyfey psychotherapy
going and he was actually uh top secret cleared
and funding secret CI mind control research.
Now, there's a lot of uh doctors and uh some
therapists out there that um dismiss the idea
of of multiple personalities. And um um one
of the things that some of these people are
saying is that it's doesn't exist and that
it's actually temporal lobe epilepsy. What
is temporal lobe epilepsy and and how is it
similar to MPD? Well, temporal lobe epilepsy
is just a form of epilepsy that takes place
in the temporal lobe of your brain. So there's
abnormal electrical discharges that cause you to
have a seizure. A typical temporal lobe seizure
invol lasts for 30 to 90 seconds. You may become
unconscious or just get a kind of foggy state of
consciousness and you'll usually like fumble
at one of your buttons or smack your lips or
turn your body in a very kind of mechanistic over
and over same little motion kind of way and then
you pop out of it after 30 seconds usually. So
temporal load epilepsy is completely unrelated
to multiple personality disorder. That's just a
bogus prejudice. And there's a bunch of research
that I and others have done that show that the
symptom picture of temporal epilepsy and multiple
personality are completely different from each
other. Why why would these people be making these
claims? What what would be, you know, why the
confusion? Uh because they're they don't take
accurate histories. They're very vague about what
they say and they just look grasping at straws
for some way to discredit multiple personality.
Basically, the the more serious criticism is that
multiple personality is often unwittingly created
by bad therapists. No, that I agree with and I've
actually testified about that in court that
in cases where I'm testifying for the patient
who's suing the therapist and I'm stating as
an expert witness that yes, this was created
by the therapist and yes, all these memories were
false and yes, it did all this harm. Now, this is
a very complex issue and one that's being hotly
debated by the public. Um, the the main thing is
that there actually is a whole bunch of science
about multiple personality and dissociation. It's
not just a matter of belief. There's a a big
literature now that has flaws in it and so on,
but there's actually a whole bunch of science.
It's not just I believe or I don't believe. The
the curious twist in the logic is that actually
I think that all of this uh documentation that
the military and the CIA have been creating
experimental multiple personality and using
it in operations actually proves that multiple
personality is real. It proves two things. One
is that unless they're just wasting money, they're
not going to bother with the whole exercise unless
you actually can create a new identity that
actually is hidden behind a real memory barrier.
Otherwise, there'll be no point, right? And that
could be that could be used operationally, right?
So then the none of it's actually really really
really real. It's all illusions inside your mind.
There isn't literally another person in there,
but nobody in the multiple personality field is
saying that it's literally real anyway to start
with. But you can create this artificial second
identity and it can actually do stuff that the
main part of the person doesn't remember. That has
to be true otherwise there would be no point in
creating it for military use. And so that proves
two things. One is that it's possible to create
multiple personality by a mistake in a bad therapy
that mimics a lot of the conditions of military
mind control or cult mind control. But also if you
have a disorder that can be created deliberately
either be by the CIA, by a destructive cult, by a
therapist who doesn't really know what they're
doing or even by the person themselves, then
it's not really a big jump to imagine that that it
could also happen just naturally and spontaneously
as a way of coping with trauma. Right. So the very
fact that you can create it artificially to me
indicates that it can be created artificially by
mistake or on purpose and also that it's likely to
happen naturally. Well, the other question is
h how they managed to create it artificially.
Um and is it a traumatic I'm writing about all
this now. I have a number of case histories that
describe it in quite a lot of detail. There's a
the there's a lot of information about how they
created Tanya and Patty Hurst. It's very detailed.
There's a very good case from Denmark. A guy named
Pali Hardrop who was uh in jail in the let's
see now late 40s in Denmark. Another prisoner
named Bujornne Nielsen used a whole lot of mind
control and hypnosis techniques and created this
uh and music bank robber and pi hardrip actually
went out and robbed a bank and then he robbed
another bank tried to rob a second bank shot
two people didn't get away with any money got
captured and the net outcome of the huge trial
with 50 witnesses and all kinds of psychiatric
testimony and so on. The net outcome of it was
that this Bejorn Nielsen guy was found guilty and
sentenced to jail even though he wasn't physically
present at any of the robberies and Pali Hardrop
was found kind of an equivalent of not guilty by
reason of insanity and they ex specifically said
at the trial all the experts did that this Bejorn
Neielson guy used hypnosis and other methods to
create a split identity hardrip. So these kind of
cases have actually come to trial and there's a
lot of detail on them. What what would these other
methods be and what would the links be between
the methods used for create artificially creating
multiple personalities and childhood trauma? Well,
the links are severalfold. One is you have to
have a pretty good control over the person's life
space. You can't just see them for half an hour,
an hour a week and that's all that's required.
So in the palihardy case, these two guys were
salemates, cellmates and also they worked in
the same workshop and were basically with each
other constantly for about 18 months. Uh if you
can isolate the person from the outside world
from contact with other people who are going
to be critical of what's going on or give a
different point of view that's helpful. These
are these things apply to destructive cults and
also deliberate creation of multiple personality.
Then if you can uh use all kinds of thought reform
techniques that is getting the person to study
doctrine do all kinds of meditation exercises,
chanting exercises, hypnotic focusing exercises,
internal dream imagery exercises, you get their
mind kind of into a trance state and focused on
what you want them to believe and focus on. Then
you actually use formal hypnosis some or drugs and
then you deliberately instruct them that you
want to create a second identity and then you
figure out what is it that this person's going
to be motivated by. So in the pali hardrip case
uh this bejorn neielson guy created uh guardian
spirit x and whenever bejorn neielson was speaking
to pi hardrop it was actually ex who was talking
through bejorn neielsen and he got pi hardup to
buy into that cuz he was interested in all
kinds of new age type stuff and then uh ex
started teaching him the path to enlightenment
and so the basic motivator was that he was going
to get to enlightenment and if he didn't follow
follow the doctrine, didn't follow the rules,
didn't follow all the tests, and didn't perform
adequately, then he would lose X and he would lose
his path to enlightenment. And that was the thing
that he was most obsessed with. So that was the
carrot that kept him going. So you have to find
some sort of carrot that'll keep the person going.
And then uh you can use uh any number of
different kinds of behavior modification
techniques which could be uh punishing the person
if they say what you don't want them to say,
rewarding them if they say what you do want
them to say. And it I mean I could go on with
the list a little bit but basically you have to
get control over the person's thoughts over their
life space and you have to set up a reward and
punishment system to steer them along the path
you want so that they become kind of robots who
just repeat the doctrine that you want and then
if you want to create the second identity you
can use uh all kinds of threats or you can use
actual trauma and fear and the trauma and the fear
and the agitation the upset drive the splitting
of the mind. just naturally cuz the human mind
tends to split or dissociate in some way to cope
with trauma all the time, right? Whether it be a
plane crash or natural disaster or sexual assault
in adulthood. And then the other ingredient with
children is that their minds just seem to be more
susceptible to this kind of splitting process.
The their child's mind tends to do that naturally.
You're listening to 88.1. We'll be right back
with the second half of this interview
with Dr. Colin Ross right after this.
Are you familiar with Jennifer Fried's work with
her theory of betrayal trauma when it deals with
child abuse? Actually, the I wasn't going into
all of this here, but the main change in my
thinking in terms of how I work with these people
clinically over the last 3 years has been shifting
much more towards a betrayal trauma type way of
looking at things. Mhm. That's not really directly
related to mind control, but yeah, I like her
theory a lot and I agree with it. Right. Um, the
false memory people, Jennifer Fried, for listeners
who don't know, is the daughter of Pamela and
Peter Fried. Pamela Fried's the executive director
of the False Memory Syndrome Foundation. And the
False Memory Syndrome Foundation takes a point
of view that multiple personality is pretty bogus
and all these memories that people in therapy are
recovering are all false. And it's just a result
of basically of mind control techniques by bad
therapists. Um the the scientific advisory board
of the false memory syndrome foundation which is
a whole bunch of academics and experts who advise
the foundation and sort of speak on behalf
of it include Martin or Jolly West who had
top secret CIA clearance. uh Harold Leaf who is
the personal psychiatrist to the Friedes also uh
was a co-author of Robert Heath who did the brain
electrode research at Tain that was funded by the
various branches of the military and the CIA and
there's um about five of Martin Orin's co-authors
or people that he thanks in publications of
his uh going back into the 50s different mind
control research that he did who are also on
the board. Margaret Singer who interviewed
these Korean prisoners of war who had top secret
clearance through the military to do that work
is also on the board. Um so there's a quite
an connection and overlap between these false
memory syndrome foundation people not all of them
but a subgroup of them and all this military mind
control research. Have you had any experiences
with the false memory syndrome foundation? And I
understand they have been fairly aggressive in uh
in intimidating uh therapists uh throughout North
America. Well, North America. Well, I've had
a fair bit of experience with the False Memory
Syndrome Foundation. I sub I belong to the False
Memory Syndrome Foundation. I get their newsletter
and I've um been talked about and have written
in their newsletter. I set up a workshop in uh
Houston where I spoke for a day and a half and
Pamela Fried the executive director spoke for half
a day and I've set up about five or six workshops
that I've done with Elizabeth Loftess who's a one
of the leading members of the advisory board. Um I
get spoke at a meeting that Steven Cece was at. He
spoke after me and he commented very favorably on
my talk. He's on the advisory board. So, I've got
a lot of uh contacts with uh some of these people
which I consider to be very friendly. I admire
their work. Uh I disagree a little bit with some
of the things I think. But by and large, I agree
with probably over half of what the majority of
people on the false memory syndrome advisory board
say. And as I mentioned earlier, I've testified
in court basically much the same as any of those
people would. that here's an example of really bad
therapy that created multiple personality out of
nowhere and caused a lot of damage and harm to
the person and their family. In the false memory
syndrome sort of camp, not necessarily the
organization itself, but in the kind of camp,
there are people who are just real extremists have
gone way overboard and they're very inflammatory
in the way they talk and everything's all black
and white and the whole multiple personality
field is supposed to be totally bad and all the
memories are completely false. And so there's
people in that camp who go way overboard. My
view on them is that if you take sort of set
aside some of the really political posturing and
the most kind of rabid politics that comes out and
you just listen to kind of the basic message,
I agree with it. I think it's been incredibly
helpful to the field. Not just uh dissocive
disorders field or sexual trauma therapists,
but the entire mental health field really. In
the 1980s, there was almost zero teaching on how
errorprone memory is, almost no teaching at all
about how to think about it, what to do about it,
what guidelines we need. All these guidelines
about false memories and memory not being reliable
really have only come out of the professional
organization starting in '94. And the False Memory
Syndrome Foundation spearheaded that. So, a lot of
the work they've done has been incredibly helpful.
I agree with it. And it's simply a fact that
memory is very unreliable, right? It's just when
you things get really polarized and everybody's
really insulting everybody else and it's a big
war, then it becomes ridiculous. Well, and and it
seems that the survivors uh of abuse are are again
revictimized by by this type of argument where um
you know, the focus seems to be proving whether a
memory was false or not instead of um actually um
finding out whether abuse did happen or not. Well,
it gets all politicized and everybody gets very
hot under the collar and very defensive about
it. like in the in the false memory syndrome
foundation the in the membership I'm sure that
there are a whole bunch of people who actually
are falsely accused but I'm sure there's also a
whole bunch of people who are accurately accused
and are just trying to run a little scam and say
it's false memories right but that that needs to
be set aside if you're trying to look at sort of
scientifically what are the issues about memory
and what's the best way to do therapy and how
do you have to kind of balance things to have
therapy that's hopefully more beneficial than
more harmful if people would get off all of the
ugly politics and have more of a sort of rational
calm scientific discussion. It' be much better.
And then uh you know then they wouldn't hear the
therapist saying that the false memory people
are all just pedophiles and you wouldn't hear
the false memory people saying that the therapists
are all insane. Now in your opinion, how has the
false memory debate affected therapy resources
available for survivors in in a general sense?
Um well it's affected negatively basically because
the a lot of the therapists have got real paranoid
and there's a lot of agitation in um insurance
companies and the managed care companies in the
United States about this kind of therapy. Now the
idea that most of the memories are false really is
just the basic standard position of psychiatry
through the whole 20th century. It's nothing
new. How how do you feel that the debate has
affected how therapists deal with their clients?
Well, I think it's been beneficial and harmful
at the same time. It's been beneficial because
therapists have had to get their act together
a little bit and be more aware that memory is
extremely vague and unreliable and that you
can't take everything at face value. And then
I've written at great length about strategically
how to plan the therapy so that you do the same
thing no matter what percentage of the memory is
true or false. Most of the time you don't know for
a fact. So, it's been very helpful in that way.
And then it's been harmful in that uh it's just
given an excuse to all kinds of people who don't
want to deal with abuse anyway to say, "Oh, it's
all false memories." And it's made the therapist
defensive and it's taken a lot of time and energy
away from treatment on to worrying about whether
you're going to get sued or not. But you can't
they're sort of opposite sides of the same coin.
You you can't have therapists finally getting
the message that they have to be more careful
without also having therapists who are more
paranoid about getting sued. U for the benefit
of other therapists that might be listening,
is there um a way to recognize signs of possible
mind control experimentation? Are there signs that
come up again and again in survivor accounts? Uh
you mean actual military or intelligence agency
mind control, right? Or because mind control
can be done informally and unwittingly by just
the pedophile father at home or it can be done by
any one of the known destructive cults or it can
be done as part of a military research program.
So it depends which level you're talking about.
I'm speaking yeah specifically of the government
uh funded experiments. No, there's no kind of uh
you know if the person comes in with a sore left
elbow that's a sure sign. There's no kind of sign
or symptom like that that's going to automatically
clue you off, but there's probably going to be
some sort of dissociative disorder. And it's it's
not so much that you go after it as the person
starts giving you memories of, you know, it wasn't
some stereotype satanic thing out in the woods.
They start actually telling you uh something
that sounds like medical research of some kind,
experiments of some kind. It's either at a
university, it's in a hospital, it's on a
military base. So, I don't think it really is a
bad plan to specifically start asking questions.
You have to just wait and for the person to start
describing that kind of stuff. And then if they
start describing that kind of stuff, you just
follow normal kind of therapy procedures where
you just say, "Could you tell me a little bit
more about that?" or I don't quite understand
this or could you clarify that or what does that
mean to you? Why is that important to you? How
is that affecting you now? How does that tie into
the problems that we're working on now? Mhm. So,
you really just handle it using basic sensible
therapy techniques that you wouldn't there's
not a special set of strategies or techniques for
mind control as such. And these people basically
are human beings who have who've been hurt and
have problems and you need to use same basic
methods of therapy you would otherwise. So like
if my personal conclusion is that probably the
majority not almost for sure the vast majority of
the satanic ritual abuse memories that I've heard
which involves like hundreds and hundreds and
hundreds and hundreds of babies being sacrificed
vast majority of that can't actually be real. Some
of it could be, but the techniques that I use and
the strategies use in therapy for people who have
those satanic ritual abuse memories are really
pretty much identical to the same strategies for
somebody who doesn't have those kind of memories.
And the same applies to the military mind control
people. The way I go at it, I use the same basic
strategies, principles, and techniques. I don't
really focus on the memories as the main problem.
Mhm. In in your um opinion, do you think there is
any links between um the accounts of ritual abuse
and mind control experimentation? Uh nothing
documented. The only the link is in the mind
control experts. The people who are contractors
for the CI and the military who understand the
mind control techniques. Therefore, the military
wants to tap into their expertise are also tend
to people be people who are experts on mind
control techniques of destructive cults. But
a direct connection between cults and the
military. The only uh book I know about
that is a book called was Jonestown a CIA medical
experiment written by a man named Michael Meyers,
right? Published by the Edwin Melon Press. and he
pres presents a lot of pretty solid documentation
that's not quite 100% conclusive that the CIA was
heavily involved in Jonestown. Right. You've gone
into a fair bit of detail in that in your your
lecture that we've previously well one couple of
just to give a little smattering of the kind of
things. One example is that the people's temple
which was run by Jim Stone Jim Jones was based in
Yukaya, California which is north of San Francisco
and then they moved down to the jungle in British
Gana. And before I read this book, I never really
thought about how did they go about choosing that
site. M well it turns out that that site in the
middle of the jungle in British Gana immediately
before Jim Jones moved down there it was the site
of the CIA shalom project which was a program for
uh black exgring Bray u military people to train
mercenaries for Angola and then there's a whole
which obviously couldn't just be coincidence and
then there's just a wealth of other detail
like that connecting all kinds of things in
Who in your sense who who do you think
is behind all of this? Like the Well,
I think I'm sort of not really that much
of a conspiracy theorist. I just think
that it boils down to typical normal stuff
that controls the rest of the world. So,
it's got to do with military and the government
and banks and helicopter sales and spying. So,
it's it's no different from, you know, who runs
radar or who runs jets or who runs anything else.
It's a lot of it's just military contracting
and it's government and it's a big business and
Mhm. I don't I don't I'm not I don't personally
subscribe to a special conspiracy theory like and
I don't think there's anyone at least the evidence
I see I don't think there's any one little group
of people who meet in some room you know somewhere
at the Pentagon who are pulling all the strings on
all this. I think it's much like the federal
government. It's all kinds of little groups
working at cross purposes and there's no one grand
master design of any kind. Right. It's a network
uh the old boys network. Uh yeah, old boys network
is the way I describe it. And that's one reason
I think of that is there doesn't have to be some
kind of huge obviously there is a conspiracy in a
sense and that it there's secret funding of mind
control research and there's files and it's kept
from the public. But in terms of the stuff that
actually documented, there didn't have to be that
huge a conspiracy because they just went ahead and
published it in the medical literature anyway. The
conspiracy is really the sort of old boys network.
Everybody just looks the other way and knows that
they're not supposed to comment on it kind of
conspiracy. Mhm. It's not that anybody has to,
you know, send out a memo to every psychiatrist in
North America saying keep this secret. Everybody
just kind of looks the other way, steers around
it, doesn't rock the boat, doesn't make waves.
I've just got a couple more questions. Um I'm
wondering uh how how a person undergoes the
healing process that that have been um traumatized
as a child or having participated um in the mind
control experimentation. What what is the process
for healing? Uh well some some people are probably
too damaged to be able to heal. U so nobody
should claim that they know how to help everybody.
um or some people are damaged and they have the
ability to heal, but I just not going to be able
to describe how that should be done. So, they
need to go to somebody else. But the people that
we work with, m multiple personality, who I'll
describe really traumatic childhoods. Um we don't
really, like I mentioned just a few minutes ago,
we don't really focus on the memories as such.
Mhm. What we deal with is how these different
personalities working together as a sort of
inner family are getting along with each other and
mostly not getting along with each other. And we
try and get them to have more open communication
and cooperation with each other, have more of a
problem solving, strategizing kind of approach to
life instead of all this conflict and fighting and
amnesia. And then uh we work on building up more
healthy, more flexible ways of coping with life.
And that's just in a nutshell to describe in
detail is that's why my book is 400 pages long,
right? Takes quite a while. Um, and you you had
mentioned that um a lot of in in in a particular
test that you've done um a lot were able to
integrate um these personalities back into a
a kind of a hole. Is that is that really the goal
of of the healing process or Well, it's the it's
the goal in one sense to be this is we're just
talking about people with multiple personality.
vast majority of people who are involved in mind
control experiments and the vast majority of
people who are abused as children don't have
multiple personality. I so I just specialize
in that little subgroup which is only little you
know small island in this whole sea of trauma but
um the reason integration is the goal for them
is basically that it's it's normal and desirable
to be sort of an integrated human being and if
you have a reasonably healthy happy childhood
and adolescence and you have a reasonably
healthy happy normal adulthood you're going
to be integrated you're not going to have
multiple personality. But the other reason
is because it just works better. It's not that
integration is the big goal in and of itself.
It's just that integration is a way to get
to the goal of far far far far less symptoms.
uh much more happy settled state internally,
much better quality of personal relationships,
much better functioning in the workplace and
huge reduction in the amount of health care and
mental health care resources you need. Now, you
mentioned that you are uh about to release a book
um about mind control. What what specifically
will the book deal with and and when will it
uh do you expect it to be published? I'm just um
I'm working just finished the second draft of the
third draft of the book. So, it's been through
three complete changes and now the final one
I've done a pretty extensive rewrite of it and
I've got a little bit more information. I'm just
uh sort of digesting and waiting to come in
from one of the universities that I got some
information from. Um and then I'll probably go
over it one more time kind of stylistically and
then we'll see if we can get a publisher to bite
on it. So, I'm hoping that it'll be out before
the end of 97. And and what specifically are you
are you dealing with in the book? Um, basically
everything that we've been talking about, the main
points are going to be that the US military and
the CIA have been creating experimental multiple
personality and that's an established fact because
of the documentation. The extent that those people
were used in operations is still not really fully
known. uh the fact that you can create artificial
multiple personality to me proves both that like I
said earlier that it can be created artificially
and also that it's likely to arise spontaneously
and I go into that in a bunch of detail and then
all this other crazy mind control research I use
that to set the context to make it believable that
multiple personality could been created by the
military cuz if you just hear that out of nowhere
it just seems too much to believe but when you
have that whole context then you realize really
just fits in nicely. And then the other part is to
try and stimulate either a presidential commission
or some sort of public inquiry into this and get
the medical ethics of it really tightened up
and make sure that this stuff is not ongoing,
right? And get some recognition and compensation
for the victims. That's basically the gist of the
book. Do you have evidence of experimental brain
implant surgery being done on epilepsy patients?
Uh well there's two answers to that question.
One is that all this documented brain electrode
implant research that I described some of those
patients actually had epilepsy and a whole bunch
of them epilepsy was kind of a phony rationale
for putting electrodes in. So when you read that
literature a lot of the time they'll describe the
patient as having epilepsy and then other times
they uh actually put brain electrodes in just for
either psychiatric reasons which were basically
bogus reasons or purely experimental reasons
but epilepsy is one of the rationale for putting
brain electrodes in that's totally documented.
And would these uh people be informed of that
they were to receive brain implants or uh yeah
but uh the sort of explanation for why that was
scientifically justified and the informed consent
procedure was really iffy. Yeah. And and what uh
what literature is available uh on this subject?
Uh there's a book called Violence in the Brain by
uh Mark and published if I remember the year
like 1970 or 72. it's a little bit hard to get
or if you go into part of the problem is you
can't do computerized searches of the medical
literature before 1966. But if you go to the
medical literature in the period 1955 to 1970
and you look for publications by Robert Heath
at Tlane University or Jose Delgado at Yale,
you'll find those scattered around in the
medical literature. Okay? Or you just do
literature searches on brain electrode implants.
Or then there's a huge literature on LSD.
It's just a matter of really going to the
library and and searching around or in the
book like I'll reference a lot of it. Well, I'd
like to thank you very much, Dr. Colin Ross,
for joining us on CKLN. It's been very
illuminating talking to you and I I wish
you all the best with your your new book. Yeah,
my pleasure. Thanks for doing a series on this.
We've been listening to an
interview with Dr. Dr. Colin Ross,
a Canadian psychiatrist working with
dissociative identity disorder and
has also documented the CIA military
mind control experimental programs.
Transcripts are available of the lecture that
started off this series at the office of CKLN for
$2. And the transcripts of this interview will
be available in 2 to 3 weeks time at CKLN.
We'll be back next week with more in the
mind control in Canada radio series on
the international connection here on 88.1 Calen.